[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veteran to the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Wilson Dickey comes by his passion for military service naturally.
His father, Frank Dickey, was an on-the-ground soldier in Vietnam who has told his story here on Veterans of the Valley.
Wilson Dickey is home after two tours, nine months in Afghanistan and a year in Iraq, where he and his platoon worked some 250 anti-sniper and anti-IED missions in the dangerous streets of Baghdad.
His is an up-close and personal account, like we don't often hear in 30-second sound bites and news clips from the war.
He and Anna Marie were married just two days before he first deployed to Afghanistan, and now, finally, they're able to get started with their life together as residents of College Station.
Please welcome Sergeant Will Dickey to Veterans of the Valley.
Well, it is an honor to have you here on Veterans of the Valley as it was an honor to have your dad a couple of years ago and talked about his Vietnam experience.
Two tours, Afghanistan and Iraq.
I want to jump right into your experiences in Iraq, and then we will go back sort of how you got into the military a little bit later on.
You deployed to Iraq in August of 2005.
You were there for a year.
Sort of talk about your platoon and what your job was there.
Absolutely.
No, we had a 19-man platoon.
that was made up of three six-man teams which involved a two-man sniper team as well as a four-man reconnaissance element that was also responsible for the security of any sniper hives that we would set up.
Primarily, it was a responsibility of ours to patrol the streets as well as some of the more dangerous neighborhoods to run anti-sniper and anti-IED, which are improvised, exposed devices that they would put onto the streets in order to try to hit the Humvees of some of the soldiers coming through.
For a good part of that year, I'd say nine or ten months, we were actively on the alternate and main supply routes in Baghdad trying to make sure that people weren't trying to blow our Humvees up.
Why don't you kind of describe in a little bit more detail, and we're going to see some photographs, compliments of Google Earth here in a moment of the actual area where you served.
but give people sort of a sense of you were patrolling a street, an area of what, one to two, two to three miles or something, and that's sort of what you were doing, patrolling and making sure that the bad guys didn't do bad things.
Absolutely, no.
We would.
We'd pick a two to three mile stretch that we would observe for anywhere from 24 to 72 hours, and we would be inserted somewhere between...
3,000 meters and 10,000 meters, which is about seven miles from where we were actually going, and walk in so that we could get into a place where we could oversee those trees.
As far as total area of responsibility, it would be like cramming two million people into the size of the Greater Bryan College Station area.
And it really is that congested.
So all the buildup, all the small neighborhoods, several thousand people within a few square blocks trying to navigate through and get into buildings where we weren't being detected in order to be able to overlook those streets is actually fairly difficult.
So if you were to sort of put it similar to a scenario here at Bryan College Station, if you could imagine overlooking or looking at a stretch, say on Highway 6, say from
from Briarcrest maybe up to Southwest Parkway, some stretch like that.
That's sort of the area that you were looking, but it wasn't quite as clean as that.
Matter of fact, you sort of equated it to take the Bryan College Station dump and put it in that area, right?
Absolutely, and string it out along the highway.
and then build up all around on the highway.
The feeder roads and the highway have very little to distinguish between the two of them, at best a dirt track in between them, not to mention the fact that traffic doesn't really have a flow.
There could be people going north in the southbound lane or south on the northbound lane, and that goes for both the main lanes and the feeders as well.
So once we did get into a hide, the first thing that we would have to do after setting up security would be to scan everything that we saw
originally on the road and try to find out if anything might be a danger to us or to anybody that would be driving by, as well as starting to set up and put checkpoints up that we could monitor throughout the days to make sure nobody was coming through to put something in after we got there.
Before we look at these Google pictures, where your reconnaissance or where you're actually viewing from
It wasn't like there was a post set up just for you to be there.
You actually had to go into residents' houses.
And I think it's just fascinating when you told me the story the other day.
about going into these houses and sort of the way that you had to go in and sort of the way that you had to treat the people because you just didn't know.
Sort of talk about that.
When we originally started running missions, we were pretty much going from scratch.
We didn't know what was going to happen when we first went.
Obviously we wanted to limit the amount of exposure we had, so we tried going into abandoned houses.
The only problem with that is that the people in those neighborhoods are just like people in our neighborhoods.
They would notice if something was different.
We tried that a couple times and it didn't work, and we started going into occupied houses, people that lived in these houses.
We would usually come into the houses either through the roof or through the front door as quietly as possible, usually breaking in using some kind of lock pick, if not a crowbar.
and going through and rounding up the residents of the houses.
And like you said, sometimes you just don't know who's gonna be in the house.
So unfortunately, a lot of times it was necessary to be a little bit rough and a little bit stern, especially at first, so that they knew that you weren't messing around, that you were there to do a job and that you had the safety of your men as well as them in mind first.
We would usually contain them to one or two rooms throughout the house, make sure they have a bathroom and a kitchen,
as well as a common room that they could stay in.
And that was also part of the security that we set up, making sure that the people had a little bit of freedom of movement and yet at the same time weren't posing any kind of threats to me or the team that I had.
And then gradually throughout the day or throughout the days, you might be able to loosen up a little bit once you got a feel for who they were, what they did,
And you had to be very careful about what houses you picked.
You didn't want to pick a prominent citizen that would be missed if he was not moving around.
Because if we were going to be there for two and a half, three days, the people weren't allowed to leave the house for two and a half, three days.
So that was another thing that came into play.
At the same time, though, you tried to stay away from abandoned houses because you told me that could be even more dangerous because an abandoned house
The people in the neighborhood knew it was supposed to be abandoned and they're going to see you in there and they're going to know what you're there for.
So that could create an even more dangerous situation.
Absolutely.
And usually the abandoned houses were somewhat ostracized or set away from the houses that were actually occupied.
So not only are you putting yourself in a position of making yourself more easily detectable, if the good people know that you're in the house, the bad people are going to know that you're there too.
you run the risk if you return to that house of having booby traps or any kind of IEDs put into the house before you get there.
Not to mention the fact that it's not as easily defendable once you isolate yourself out on an island and basically give everybody a heads up, hey, there's six guys here and we don't really have any backup.
So you had to be very careful about how you got into a house, what house you chose,
not to mention making sure that the house that you did choose had proper fields of fire and security set up in it.
Now, you told me that, say, if you were on a six-hour span, say, in a particular house, that you would spend a couple of hours on glass, which meant on binoculars or scopes, some time down and then some time in security.
Is that how it worked?
Absolutely, and it does.
It becomes very monotonous, and that's one of the things you have to guard against.
So,
Number one, the priority is pulling the reconnaissance or the oversight on the area that you've actually picked.
You've picked that area for a reason.
You want to make sure that that job gets done.
The first and foremost priority anytime that you ever do any mission in the Army is security.
Making sure that you have full 360 degree security so that if anything does happen, you can catch it before it gets to be a problem.
And then obviously having the security on the people.
So yeah, you would...
probably break it up in either half hour or one hour shifts.
Anything more than that, you're not going to be able to remain very vigilant on what we call glass because it actually hurts your eyes, especially in the in the harsh sunlight to be staring through binoculars or whatnot.
And then spend a little bit of downtime usually with your eyes closed, laying back, or simply relaxing.
And then you would get up and take a turn, you know, interacting with the people of the house.
A lot of times.
It was the security part of it.
Which was the security part.
And a lot of times you would actually spend that time questioning them about things that were going on in the neighborhood, trying to get any kind of intelligence that you could, though they don't speak very good English.
So that wasn't always a great possibility.
Right, right.
I want to give people a sense of exactly what you were looking for.
And what you were looking for were
the enemy planting explosive devices, not necessarily in vehicles, but actually on the road.
Because you said that these roads were just full of trash.
So there could be soft drink cans, there could be coffee cans, there could be any kind of normal devices that they could come along, put an explosive device in.
And this is the kind of thing that you were looking for.
Absolutely.
As I said earlier, the traffic patterns aren't exactly set like they are in the United States.
So the amount of traffic that's stopping, whether it be because the car engine has stopped or because it's overheating or because they've run out of gas, is always a problem.
One of the things that always draws your attention is when a car stops on the road.
Usually, their improvised explosive devices were pre-made, and they're what we refer to as pop-and-drop IEDs.
They would usually be set up with an electric current, like a walkie-talkie or a cell phone, and they would toss those down the streets.
It would only take a few seconds for them to stop, toss it out, and drive off.
So it was very tough to remain vigilant enough to stop and see every car on a two- or three-mile stretch that was stopped, and you would usually have two people looking at the same time
in different sectors of the road.
Well, go ahead and take a look right now at these three photographs that we came up with on Google Earth.
As a matter of fact, a lot of people have been to that website.
It's really fascinating.
Let's go to the first one, and here it is, and that's Baghdad.
That's Greater Baghdad right there.
That is a very large area.
There are about 10 million people within that area that we're looking at right now.
The large river that you see running through it is the Tigris River, which is one of the oldest rivers.
And our area of responsibility was basically left of that river.
The majority of our time was spent in the middle of that area, the middle left side, but we were responsible for that whole thing.
Right.
If you look over to the left of your screen, about halfway down, you'll see a lake that on this picture, it looks kind of L-shaped.
I think people will see you were actually just to the right or just to the east of that in that area.
Is that right?
Absolutely.
That lake is actually on Camp Liberty, which is a huge base.
that has about 55,000 Americans on it, and that was one of the palace lakes for Saddam Hussein when he was alive.
And the camp basically encompasses that lake, and that's where we would base our missions out of.
That's where we would go back to for downtime, R&R, any kind of refit, as well as where we slept when we weren't on missions and whatnot.
Now imagine that area right there, just where that L-shaped lake is on the far left of the screen, and just to the east of that or to the right of that where you see a series of blue dots.
And imagine you're on Google Earth now and we're going to go to our next picture and we're going to go right down into a street.
You can see on the right side that is an exploded Humvee right there that this picture was taken as it exploded.
And this is an actual section of road that you and your platoon observed, right?
Absolutely.
No, I've actually been in the majority of the houses both on the north and south side of that road.
That road runs east-west and is actually one of the alternate supply routes that runs through Baghdad.
We referred to it as S.O.R.D.
That was its code name.
It actually runs all the way out to the west to Abu Ghraib and then farther out to Fallujah and goes as far east as you go through Iraq.
And again, that's almost set up exactly like Highway 6 with two two-lane roads going east and west and then two one-lane feeder roads on each side.
And you can't see it very clearly, but all the brown stuff in between is actually filled with trash and whatnot.
In between the two roads, yeah.
From this area, it doesn't look like it, but it is, and that's where the explosive devices would be put, I guess, or on the sides of the road, too.
Now, in the middle, we see what appears to be some sort of a commercial area.
In the middle, north of the road, that's a commercial area, but around it is obviously residential houses.
And I guess these houses are mainly two or three-story houses, is that right?
They are, they go all the way up to three, some of them four stories, though that's actually fairly rare.
The residential area that you're talking about actually surrounds the very middle of the north side, which is a school.
And then just behind that is actually a very prominent citizen's house.
And that blue area that you see up there is actually a swimming pool that's both indoor and outdoor.
And like you said, it would be just like in South College Station surrounding the College Station Middle School.
You're going to have residential houses.
And then obviously you're going to have thoroughfares running through there.
Now we're going to remember that last picture and you saw that exploding Humvee on the right side.
Well, now we've moved the picture over and that same exploding Humvee is now on the left side of the picture.
And we've gone obviously to the east of that.
And tell us why we're looking at this picture.
This is a not very good part of town.
It was what we refer to as Amaria.
These are basically built up urban areas in which several families might live in one house.
It might be divided by story.
it might be divided by actual houses with whose family is in that.
Then again, a lot of these houses have been abandoned by families because of the violence that was going on and have been filled with people that didn't wish to do very many good things to the US troops.
So we spent actually a lot of time going through there and actually trying to clear some of those houses out to see who was in there and what they were up to.
Some fascinating pictures in a fascinating place that has been a part of our conscious now for some seven years, or nearly seven years now.
I asked you the other day when we were visiting to the extent of your own comfort level, first off, let's say that when the people were caught in the act, the rules of engagement would come into play.
Absolutely.
And you would shoot them.
Yes.
You had to do that.
Unfortunately, it was necessary.
And again, when you're actually over there, your mindset is not set as you would assume one person's who was back here would be.
It becomes a survival of the fittest type of thing.
It's your job, it's your responsibility and your duty, not only to protect yourself, but to protect the people who might be harmed for no reason at all.
And that involves both the civilians that might be walking down the street as well as the troops that were patrolling the streets that day.
So, yeah, unfortunately, people were dumb enough to come through and try to do that while we were watching, even though they knew we were watching.
And several of them unfortunately died for what they were doing.
Let's backtrack a little bit.
You went to, you and Anna Marie were married two days before you were deployed to Afghanistan.
Not much of a honeymoon there.
Obviously some hurdles that you all went through for that as any couple would, but sort of talk about that time and getting into the military.
You upped for six years, which your parents were a little incredulous to, but talk about getting into the military and your first deployment to Afghanistan.
Sure.
My life after high school was bumming around quite a bit.
I attended a few different colleges, both Baylor and Blinn and Trinity Valley Community College out in Palestine.
I wasn't a very good student, and though I had no problems working, it just wasn't working out very well.
And I always figured that I would end up in the military, at least for a time.
And as my life started sliding and sliding and sliding, I started taking a more serious look at it.
And so I did.
I signed up for six years, which, as you said, my parents were a tad bit perturbed about.
And I responded to my dad, hey, it's a peacetime army.
What's the worst thing that can happen?
Went through basic training, airborne school down in Fort Benning, Georgia.
Actually dropped out of what they call the Ranger Indoctrination Program due to medical reasons and was shipped off to Fort Drum, New York, which is a tad bit different than Texas.
And there wasn't very much to do in Watertown, New York.
So...
A lot of us would go up to visit the Canadian border and some of the border towns, which is where I met my wife.
And we spent almost a full year together being friends and dating before I found out about my deployment to Afghanistan.
We had actually decided to wait for the wedding.
And a few days before I actually left, she said, we should just get married before you go.
And it was actually a very quick deal where my parents came up and her parents came down.
And we actually got married just before I left.
And that made the deployment actually fairly tough, knowing that I had just left behind a brand new wife.
She obviously wasn't as equipped to deal with it as some of the people that had been through classes and had that support group.
And as well for me, it was new for me to be married.
So it was an adventure, to say the least, trying to make sure that we got all the contact we needed while we were over.
You remember the 2nd Battalion, 87th Infantry.
Eventually you were transferred to the 1st Battalion, I believe, but talk about your, and you were actually in Egypt on 9-11.
Absolutely.
We deployed over what they call the multinational force and observers, which is a multinational force that's in charge of making sure that
Both Israel and Egypt respect the boundaries that were set by NATO after the Seven Days War over the peninsula that runs through there.
And so it was actually a fairly close deployment for the first couple months.
And then September 11th came along, and we went from spending time in the on-base bars to being fully loaded, ready to go, and in uniforms.
And things were a little bit tough.
It obviously changed the face of everything we knew within a few hours, and it was quite a startling change.
Indeed.
We got some more pictures.
These are pictures from your photo album that I want to go to, and we're going to let you talk about each one of them.
It's sort of a mixed bag of photographs.
Talk about that picture, where it was taken.
Absolutely.
That was actually on Bagram Air Force Base.
We were waiting to deploy up to a small place called Barakalton, the very northern peninsula of Afghanistan.
Mm-hmm.
That's one of my good buddies Fedor right there.
Specialist Fedor was one of my saw gunners on my team.
And as you can see, we have some very, very heavy rock stacks sitting above us.
And we're just actually trying to get a little bit of last rest before we take off.
That's Wilson on the left there.
Okay, let's move on to the next one.
You're pointing out to a backpack there, and that's not just any old backpack.
That's not a school backpack.
That's something else.
Talk about that.
That rucksack actually weighed about 140 pounds.
There were two different radios as well as an anti-tank rocket launcher strapped onto the back of that thing.
You can kind of see that at the very bottom of the backpack.
You can see that metal cylindrical...
things sticking out.
Absolutely.
And that was the rocket launcher, right?
It was.
It actually weighs about 36 pounds.
So it took up a pretty good chunk of that.
And that rucksack was going to sustain me for about the next three months.
So if I needed anything at all for the next three months, it was in that bag.
It was actually a pretty big adventure to take off with that.
Wow.
Doing a little dance there.
I showed this one because that's obviously one of your living quarters.
Absolutely.
That is what we call a GP small in the Army.
And that fits probably 20 people standing up in it.
And we actually slept 15 people in it.
So it wasn't designed for that many, but we had to take the things that we had and make them last.
And you can see me and Specialist Reynolds there on the left getting ready to stack some sandbags around them so that we'd have a little bit of safety.
Great picture.
This is your group in Afghanistan?
Absolutely.
That is actually 2nd Platoon of Bravo Company, 2nd Battalion, 87th Infantry.
I think I can point you out.
You're right there on top with the burr haircut.
Is that right?
Absolutely.
With the bare head.
We were just getting back from recovering a cache that recovered several tons of ammunition that the Afghanis had had squirreled away.
and that was us after about a six-day mission, and all of us wanted to get back and get a little bit of sleep if we could.
What have we got here?
Well, unfortunately, we didn't get a lot of sleep because we had a lot of improvements to do.
That is actually a 120-millimeter mortar pit, and that is me digging out the ammo bunker there.
The ammo bunker would hold enough ammunition to sustain that gun through
any type of assault that we might have.
So it had to be about eight foot deep and 10 feet wide.
And that was pretty much bedrock that we were digging into right there.
I don't know what time of year this was taking.
You were there for a full year, but what was the temperature range there?
And when it got hot, it got hot, right?
Absolutely.
No, it had just started cooling off.
This is in about November.
I see.
And it's probably 75 or 80 degrees outside.
Well, it's just very pleasant then, right?
But...
But in the hottest part of the year?
Oh, about 136, 140.
It would black out any digital watches or radio faces that you had, and it could boil the water inside your canteens.
I was on the sideline at the Fresno State game this last year.
I kind of know what you were talking about.
This is you on the right and a fellow that means a lot to you.
It is.
That's the platoon leader that I had while I was in Afghanistan.
He actually mentored me through two different promotions.
His name was Lieutenant Han, and he was by far one of the best young leaders that I ever had the pleasure of working with.
An actual West Point graduate that came to us only a couple months before we left.
And one of the few officers that knew the difference between leading his men and being able to listen to his NCOs.
Do you keep up with him at all?
Do you know, is he home or do you know where he is?
He actually just got back from a second deployment.
He has just got his captain's bars and he is recently married and has a child on the way.
So Mr. Captain Hahn there is doing quite well for himself.
Well, great.
I hope you all stay in touch.
Obviously, a training with your sniper training there?
Absolutely.
This was just a few minutes or just a few months before we left for Afghanistan.
And that is one of the sniper ranges that we would go to.
Obviously, we had to practice shooting in several different positions, though usually we would have several things around us or some kind of camouflage.
But that's what we call a sitting unsupported position.
And I'm probably shooting in about 400 or 500 meters right there.
Now, I take it that this picture isn't flipped in any way.
Are you left-handed?
I'm right-handed, but I'm left-eye dominant, which means I shoot all weapons left-handed.
Well, when I saw this picture, I was going to ask that question.
Writing home.
One of the things that I spent a lot of time doing, any downtime that I had, obviously I was a lovesick newlywed.
And though you do try to shift your emotions as best you can to becoming pretty much autonomous,
the majority of your time off is spent either writing letters to your parents or your wife.
Now, this was in the States, actually.
We go backwards here.
That's in the States, actually, during some of your basic and your training, right?
Absolutely.
This is actually another practice deployment, training deployment, before we went to Afghanistan.
On the far left is Sergeant Jeffrey Martinez, who was my Alpha Team leader.
And that is PFC Thomas Sanchez, who was another one of my saw gunners on my squad.
And those two guys had just gotten done with a full assault in a Mount City and had actually just gotten awarded two Army Commendation Medals for their things that they had done.
Outstanding.
This is up on what we call an OPLP, an observation post, listening post.
Me and two other guys would usually spend anywhere from 7 to 12 days isolated anywhere from 12 to 2,000 meters away from the main camp, and we would sit up on top of a mountain and watch the valleys and the mountaintops to make sure that anybody that was walking through there was supposed to be there.
Here's you and Anna Marie.
Absolutely, the love of my life.
She really did do a lot to sustain me through those two deployments.
And as I said, she is a model military wife.
She stayed strong.
She never broke down or cried in inopportune times.
She's from Canada.
She stayed in Canada during your Afghanistan deployment.
And this is one of the pictures that she sent you, right?
Absolutely.
And as I said, she did a great job of sending letters and pictures.
And as you can see, a beautiful young lady like that would always boost the morale of some of the soldiers that would be deployed over.
It was my great fortune to have her to send me pictures and boost my morale.
Got to meet her the other day.
She's a lovely lady.
She's a registered nurse in critical care at the med right now.
Speaking of your family, I know you have two sisters, Danielle and Elizabeth, and your mom and your dad.
We talked about your dad.
We didn't talk that he was a long-time coach, and he coached you for...
four years in high school at different schools, as a matter of fact.
Absolutely.
And, of course, your mom, Dr. Nancy Dickey, the president of the A&M Health Science Center and former president of the American Medical Association, and very valuable member of this community.
And you said something about her the other day when I said she was a valuable member of the community.
What did you say?
She's a pretty valuable part of our family, too.
As many lessons as I took from my father coaching me in football, I can honestly say that I took just as many lessons from my mother and her perseverance, not only in her personal but in her professional life.
We're all very proud of her, and we all respect the heck out of everything she's done, not just for our family but the community as well.
Indeed, and this community appreciates her and appreciates you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sergeant Will Dickey, for your service and for being here.
While we debate the politics of the war, one thing that can never be debated is the commitment and the courage of the men and the women who are giving up some of the best years of their youth to serve.
And one such man is College Station's Wilson Dickey.
And we thank him for his service, as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]
[Silence.]